# PEATREST: A lifecycle assessment (LCA) model of carbon fluxes for restored afforested peatlands

## Jacob O'Sullivan 2026

The life cycle assessment (LCA) PEATREST is a new tool for assessing the carbon fluxes associated with restoring peatland previously drained for forestry. The LCA quantifies the carbon fluxes due to restoration interventions and ecosystem recovery compared against a ‘counterfactual’ of forestry retention. Based on this assessment, the model predicts two summary statistics: the carbon payback time and the carbon flux intercept. These represent the time following harvesting at which the peatland is predicted to first store or sequester more carbon than if the forestry had been retained. The tool is sensitive to a variety of site-specific variables including hydrology (water table depth), yield class of the forestry and key aspects of the management strategy employed during the restoration. The LCA has been coded as an R package which will be publicly available via a Github repository along with a detailed description of how to implement the model.
The PEATREST LCA computes two carbon flux time series. One represents the counterfactual scenario in which the forestry is left in place. The second represents the specific restoration intervention strategy as selected by the user. For the counterfactual, the model accounts for three key processes: carbon sequestration by the forest, gaseous emissions (CO2/CH4) from the drained peat under the forest stand and leaching of aquatic carbon (DOC and POC). The restoration scenario includes: emissions associated with harvesting and management, carbon loss due to decay of forest biomass, including from wood products, gaseous emissions from the peatland and aquatic carbon losses. An example of the compound time series generated by the model is shown in Fig. ES1. 

Negative sequestration rates (i.e. net emissions) in the forestry counterfactual (red) occur when soil emissions and aquatic carbon losses exceed forest sequestration. In the restoration scenario (blue), net emissions occur during the early phase of the restoration due to a combination of management interventions, decomposition of forest biomass and lag times in the restoration of peatland ecosystem function. The dashed lines represent the carbon payback time and CO2 eq. flux intercept predicted by the LCA. For the evaluation shown here, the peatland sequestration rate is expected to exceed that of the counterfactual after 15 years. The carbon stored by the peatland, after accounting for early losses following restoration, is predicted to exceed that of the forestry after 55 years.
To run the model the user must input the following:
•	Area to be harvested/restored (ha)
•	Tree species (currently only Sitka spruce and Scots pine are available)
•	Either a) Yield class or b) average tree height (m) and stand age (years)
•	Drainage depths at the site (m) at the time of tree removal
•	Water table depth under the trees (m)
•	Peat depth at the site (m)
•	Expected restoration time (years) following restoration. Work to predict restoration times for various restoration strategies based on both monitoring and modelling is on-going and will inform future iterations of the PEATREST LCA.
•	Restoration strategy including whether the forestry will be harvested and removed for processing or felled and left on site. The following restoration interventions are included as options: mulching of forest biomass left on site, damming of drainage, bund installation, smoothing of the peat and stump flipping, re-turfing, and fertilisation of the bog plants. Each of these interventions comes with associated emissions. Inputs representing emissions factors, efficiencies and decay rates are set to defaults but may be updated by expert users.
For tractability, the LCA makes several core assumptions that users must consider when interpreting results. Forest growth is represented using a simplified model which is parameterised to reproduce the productivity of the forestry but ignores environmental fluctuations or long-term change. Emissions rates from peats are predicted from water table depths only which are represented by annual averages; stochastic or intra-annual variation is ignored. Additional drivers of emissions rates such as temperature, soil chemistry or litter input from the trees are not considered. Aquatic carbon losses are represented using empirically estimated ratios to gaseous emissions. The restoration of ecosystem function is represented using arbitrary functions chosen for their qualitative properties but not derived from first principles. Post-restoration water table depths are set to typical values observed in pristine peatlands. 
